if you have a system at equilibrium and you change the volume of it, and here in
particular we're talking about a gaseous system, what's going to happen?
So what do we know about volumes when it comes to gases? We say that a decrease
in volume of the gaseous system causes an increase in total pressure. What equation
leaps to your mind when I say those words? Exactly, p v equals n r t. Yes. So there's
a relationship between pressure and volume -- n is the number of moles, r is our gas
constant, and t is our temperature. This is one of the things that usually sticks from
high school, and if you haven't seen it before, it's pretty easy to get up to speed with
this equation.
So Le Chatelier's principle then predicts that the system will respond if possible in a
way to reduce the total pressure. So if you decrease the volume and you cause an
increase in total pressure, Le Chatelier says wait a minute, the system wants to
respond to minimize that stress, so that it's going to respond in such a way to reduce
that total pressure. So let's look at some examples of this.
So we have an example of a reaction where we have two moles of p 2 gas going to
one mole going to p 4 gas. And I have a little cartoon here to show this. So we have
our p 4 gas up here, and our p 2 gas. All right, so what's going to happen if we're
going to change the volume of this system? So if we're going to decrease the volume
of the system, then the reaction should shift toward products. So let's think about
that. So here in the middle we have our sort of system, and then on one side what
happens when you decrease the volume and on the other side we're expanding the
volume. So first, let's consider our system when we're going to compress that
volume, decrease that volume. So what would be true is that the system's going to
respond in such a way to minimize that stress that has been put forward by
decreasing the volume, and you're going to try to compensate for that, and in this
case you can compensate by a shift toward products. Why is that? Well, it all has to
do with the stoichiometry of this equation up here. So for every two moles of
reactants, you get one mole of products. So if you shift from the two to the one, that
will cause a decrease in pressure, and so that will help compensate for the increase
in pressure caused by the switch in volume. So you're going to respond in such a
way to compensate for that stress. So a shift to the reaction to the right decreases
the total pressure.
So now let's think more about why this is true. Let's think about it from a math
perspective and also just this qualitative perspective. So let's consider it in terms of
q and k. So suppose our volume is decreased by a factor of 2, let's just make it easy,
and we have constant temperature here. So this change will increase the partial
pressure of both gases, the reacting gas and the product gas, and it's going to
increase them both by the same amount, by 2 initially.
So let's look at our equation for q, the reaction quotient. We have partial pressure of
products over the partial pressures of the reactants, a raise to the coefficient to the
equation. So initially you're going to increase the pressure, partial pressure of both
gases by 2 -- then your product by 2, the reactant by 2 -- but here it's 2 squared. So
overall, q becomes 1/2. So q decreases by a factor of 2, and so q becomes less then
k. And so, in the clicker question, we talked about what happens when q becomes
less than k, and what happens there is you're going to shift toward products until q
equals k again.
So you can think about this in terms of q and k, and you can also just think about it
how many moles of gas are on one side, how many mold of gas on the other side,
and how are you going to correspond, how are you going to decrease or minimize
the stress on the system.
All right, so let's think about what happens if we increase the volume, so here is our
system and now we're going to expand it. If we're going to increase the volume,
what's going to happen to the total pressure? I'm hearing it, but I want everyone to
answer. Thank you. All right, so it will decrease the pressure. And what that's going
to do is shift toward reactants, because we want to compensate for that decrease in
pressure, and to do that, we can increase the pressure by switching or shifting the
reaction toward the reactants. So again, we're going from one mole of product on
one side to two of the reactants. So here, we see a shift toward the reactants. And
so, this shift to the left is going to increase the total pressure to compensate for the
decrease in pressure that was a result of this applied force to the system. And we
could do this again in terms of q and k.
Now we're going to get a little trickier. What happens if we add an inert gas to a
system increasing the total pressure at constant temperature? So we're not adding
one of the reactants or one of the products, we're adding an inert gas, and we're
increasing the total pressure. What's going to happen? There's a couple of options,
what do you think? How about nothing. Why would nothing happen? Well, q depends
on the partial pressure of the reactant gas and the product gas. And in this particular
example, the partial pressures are not changing. We are changing the total pressure
of the system by adding an inert gas, but we're not changing the partial pressure.
So let's take this opportunity to review partial pressures, or if you haven't seen it
before, I'm going to tell you everything you need to know about partial pressures. So
here's a little review, or for the first time, description of partial pressure.
So what is the definition? The partial pressure is the pressure that each gas would
exert if it were present alone in the container. So in this example, we have oxygen in
a container, and we have one atmosphere of pressure. In the second one there's
nitrogen in the container with one atomosphere of pressure. If you put this amount
of oxygen and this amount of nitrogen together in a container, then you would have
two atmospheres of total pressure, but you're still going to have one atmosphere of
partial pressure for oxygen, and one atmosphere of partial pressure for nitrogen. So
it's as if the gas is alone in the container. That's the definition of partial pressure. So
let's look at some equations.
So the partial pressure of a gas, p to sub a, is equal to the number of moles of that
gas, and we also have in this equation, r, our gas constant, t, our temperature, and
v, our volume. The total pressure on the system, which is what this two atmospheres
is, is equal to the partial pressure of gas a, which would be the partial pressure of
the oxygen at one atmosphere, the partial pressure of the nitrogen at one
atmosphere, that's all we have here. So the partial pressure of those two, of one
plus one, we have two for a total. And that's equal to the total number of the moles.
So in these problems, we're going to be considering partial pressure, and the
question you're going to be asking yourself in all of these different wordings of the
question is is the partial pressure of the gas changing? That's a very important
question to ask because that'll help you answer the questions correctly.
So let's go back to the original question, what happens if an inert gas is added to the
container, increasing the total pressure at constant temperature? And the answer is
nothing, because q is not affected, because q depends on the partial pressures, and
the partial pressure isn't changing. We aren't changing the number of moles of the
gas in question, we're just changing the total pressure of the system, we're adding
an inert gas. And because partial pressures don't change, q doesn't change, and if q
doesn't change, there's no response from the system.
So a lot of the questions in this unit, they're not actually very difficult, but the
wording can be tricky. And so when you're doing these problems, you have to be
thinking about what is changing and what isn't changing to be able to get these
questions correct. And if you do that, then these are some nice questions for you to
get right on the exams -- they're short, they're good questions to go after.
All right. Let's see how you're doing with this. What happens if an inert gas is added
to the container, but the total pressure is now kept constant, temperature is also
constant. So let's think about this. OK, let's take 10 more seconds. OK, we're going
down into the 60's -- again, we're heading toward the 90's by the end, but this is
actually new material, so that's fine.
All right, so let's think about it. So the reaction's going to shift toward reactants.
Let's think about why, let's break it down. And what was important is that hint that
for the pressure to be kept constant, the volume of the container must have
increased. So let's take a look at that.
So if the total pressure was kept constant, if the total pressure didn't change when
you added an inert gas, the volume must have changed. Let's look at this. Say
oxygen is our gas of interest, and n 2 is an inert gas. If we added an inert gas to our
system, the total pressure should go up. If it doesn't, then something else must have
changed, and what must have changed is the volume. Otherwise the total pressure
would not have stayed the same. So the volume of the container must have
increased if the pressure is the same.
